=== Video Metadata ===
Title: Worse Than the Hindenburg: The Crash of the USS Akron | A Short Documentary | Fascinating Horror
Channel: Fascinating Horror
Upload Date: 20241008
Duration: 11:54
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUS8A78lOXk
=== Transcript ===

On the 4th of April 1933, one of the largest flying objects in the world, the airship the USS Akron, nosed its way slowly through fog off the coast of New Jersey. As it entered a turbulent current of air, it began to fall, dropping rapidly towards the ocean below. The captain ordered the ballast to be ejected. Tons of water ballasts sprayed into the air below the ship. The great dirigible stabilized, but only for a moment. At this point in time, as it hung there above the stormy surface of the Atlantic Ocean, the USS Akron was only minutes away from total destruction. Airships had seen considerable use during the First World War. Airships belonging to both the Central and Allied powers were used for scouting missions and later for some limited bombing runs. Airships were slower than aeroplanes, but were often able to avoid being shot down by planes by flying at much higher altitudes. They could also carry large payloads. Of course, being deployed from so high up, the payloads they carried rarely landed on target. By 1917, all combatants had completely abandoned the idea of using airships anywhere near the front. But they continued to have an important role transporting cargo, carrying out reconnaissance, and occasionally attempting bombing runs. By the end of World War I, airships had proved themselves nowhere near as useful as planes for direct combat, but had been developed to the point where many countries recognized their value and wished to develop the technology further. The US was one such country, although its airship program had an inauspicious start. The very first airship to be completed, the DN-1, was destroyed shortly after delivery, when it was torn from its moorings during a storm. The US then attempted to buy the R-38 airship from Britain, only for it also to be destroyed in an accident during a test flight before it could be delivered. These early difficulties did eventually give way to progress. The US constructed the USS Shenandoah. First flown in 1923, this airship was so vast that, at the time of completion, it contained the majority of the entire world's supply of helium. It was soon joined by the USS Los Angeles. This ship also ran on the same supply of helium, and so only one of the two, the Shenandoah or the Los Angeles, could be flown at any one time. Though the Shenandoah crashed a few years into its service, the Los Angeles flew for almost a decade, during which time the US Navy was able to carry out numerous tests and experiments. The capabilities of these early airships spurred further research, and convinced Navy leaders that airships were viable, valuable and worth building. Construction of the USS Akron was completed in 1931 in Akron, Ohio. It was the world's first aircraft carrier airship. Filled with helium, it was 239 meters or 785 feet in length, and thus the largest flying object that had ever been constructed at that point in time. It was capable of carrying several lightweight F9C Sparrowhawk fighter planes, which could be launched and landed back on board while the airship was in flight, using a specially designed trapeze. The Akron was certainly an impressive airship, but despite the ambitious design it was plagued by problems. One issue was with the planned spy basket, a basket that could be lowered on a long tether beneath the airship. A single passenger in the basket would be able to take observations from below the level of clouds, while the airship itself remained safe and hidden above. During the first ever unmanned test of this device however, the basket began swaying violently, until it was swinging through an arc of almost 180 degrees beneath the Akron. This movement threatened to destabilize the ship as a whole, and would certainly have ejected any passenger unlucky enough to be in the basket. After some time, it was reeled safely back in, and the planned spy basket was abandoned altogether. Later, on the 11th of May 1932, the Akron arrived at Camp Kearney Military Base in San Diego. Awaiting it on the ground were dozens of sailors who were tasked with manually securing the airship's mooring lines. Though they were used to carrying out similar tasks as a team, the sailors hadn't had any specific training for dealing with airships before. As the Akron descended, one line was successfully secured, but before the other lines could be fixed, the airship began to rise. With its fuel tanks almost empty, it was unusually light, and the morning sunlight striking the outer shell was sufficient to warm the helium within, increasing its lift and forcing the airship into an uncontrolled ascent. At first, the sailors on the ground held on tight to their lines, attempting to stop the airship's rise. Thoughthey strained to keep the Akron under control, it quickly became apparent that this wouldn't be possible. There was no other choice but to cut the one secured mooring line, as leaving it in place would potentially cause the airship to turn on its nose and crash. The moment this line was cut, the Akron shot up into the sky. The majority of the sailors on the ground released their grip on the trailing lines. Four of them, however, hesitated before letting go, and were dragged up into the air by the ascending airship. With no solid ground beneath their feet, the natural instinct of these four men was to cling onto the rope. Only one was able to force himself to let go, while still relatively close to the ground. He fell 4.5 meters or 16 feet, broke his arm, but survived. The three other sailors held on, and within just a few seconds were carried up to a height from which a fall would be fatal. Now, from the ground below, their fellows shouted at them, not to let go, and to hold on as tightly as they could. They did exactly this, but as the airship rose higher, two of the men lost their grip and fell to their death. The final man, apprentice Seaman Siam Kauat, was able to tie the line around his body. After nearly an hour of dangling high above the earth, he was hauled aboard the Akron, and ultimately survived. In a later interview, he said, I just hung on. I saw the other fellows fall, and it didn't make me feel any too good, but there was nothing I could do about it, except to hang on tighter. This accident was caught on film, and images of the dangling men were published in newspapers. The horrifying nature of what had happened led some crew to question whether the Akron was cursed. Their feelings about the ship might have been confirmed by the numerous occasions when it encountered difficulties, struggled through storms, or sustained minor damage during takeoff or landing. But no mishap would take the Akron out of service, until the worst accident of all, on the 4th of April 1933. In the early morning hours of that day, the Akron was navigating its way northward, just off the coast of New Jersey. It was foggy, and the weather was rapidly worsening. Rain and strong winds buffeted the airship, while the crew struggled to make progress through turbulent air, and in almost zero visibility. Following a particularly severe bout of turbulence, the airship entered an uncontrolled dive, which was only briefly arrested by the jettisoning of ballast. The Akron soon started descending again, until the tails skimmed the surface of the Atlantic Ocean. Water flooded into the aircraft as it struggled to rise again, but it was too late. Its nose tilted upwards, and then the USS Akron, collapsed into the ocean. The crew of a nearby German merchant ship, the Phoebus, witnessed the crash, but in the extremely poor weather, mistook the airship for a plane. As the wreckage sunk beneath the waves, they dispatched rescue boats, and were able to pull four men from the water, one of whom died shortly thereafter. Among the survivors was a man named Richard Deal, nicknamed Lucky. He had been given the nickname after narrowly escaping death on board the USS Shenandoah, which had crashed during a thunderstorm in 1925. Richard had been due to be on board the doomed airship, but had been moved at the last minute. Now he had survived again, one of only three men to do so out of a crew of 76. It was the most deadly airship accident ever to take place, resulting in twice as many deaths as the world famous crash of theHindenburg in 1937. It appeared, following the recovery of bodies, that many crew members had survived the actual crash, only to perish in the rough waters of the Atlantic as a result of drowning, exhaustion, or hypothermia. Following this, American airship crews were issued life jackets to help them survive in the event of a crash landing in water. A few years later, the USS Macon was damaged by severe weather, and crashed into the Pacific Ocean with 83 crew members on board. Thanks in part to the flotation aids that were available to the crew, 81 survived, an almost completely opposite outcome from the crash of the USS Akron. Despite this change making airship flights somewhat safer for crew and passengers, the crash of the Akron was nonetheless a huge blow to the US airship program, not least because, among the dead, was rear admiral William Moffitt, one of the greatest advocates for airship development. This loss led to the end of the Navy airship program, although the US Army continued to develop airships, many of which proved useful during the Second World War. Although airships were not particularly effective for offensive purposes, they were often used forreconnaissance, transport, and to escort ships at sea to offer protection against enemy aircraft. After the war, as airplanes became more advanced, airships became an increasingly rare sight in the US, and are now considered mostly obsolete. The crash of the USS Akron in 1933 remains, and likely will remain, the most deadly airship crash ever to take place.
